Blog - PostHog vs Heap (#5397)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/posthog-vs-heap.md

---
date: 2023-02-28
title: PostHog vs Heap
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-vs-mixpanel/posthog-vs-mixpanel.jpeg
featuredImageType: full
author: ["andy-vandervell"]
category: General
tags:
  - Comparisons
  - Product analytics
  - Session recording
---

Want to know how PostHog and Heap are different? If you remember nothing else, remember these two points:

1. Heap is a product analytics tool designed for non-technical users.

2. PostHog is an all-in-one platform for product analytics, session recording, feature management, and more, built for engineers and product teams.

In this guide, we'll cover:

- Heap and PostHog's [core features](#core-features)
- [Product analytics](#product-analytics) features and insight types
- [Session recording](#session-recording) capability 
- [Third-party integrations](#integrations), including data export and data import options
- [Privacy](#privacy-compliance) and [security](#admin--security)
- [Frequently asked questions](#frequently-asked-questions)

## How is PostHog different to Heap?

> ### 1. PostHog is your single source of truth

Reviewer: Also Heap themselves talk about being a single source of truth on their home page, so this needs to be a strong argument if we are going to make it.

> ### 1. PostHog is your single source of truth

Author: Yeah, agreed. All-in-oness is a better fit.

> Heap, like Amplitude and Mixpanel, focuses mainly on product analytics. That means you need to adopt multiple tools for things like session recording, feature management, and A/B testing. PostHog integrates all these features into one platform, so it becomes your single source of truth. We believe you should own your data, so exporting to data warehouses is free on all tiers.

Author: Destinations

> Heap, like Amplitude and Mixpanel, focuses mainly on product analytics. That means you need to adopt multiple tools for things like session recording, feature management, and A/B testing. PostHog integrates all these features into one platform, so it becomes your single source of truth. We believe you should own your data, so exporting to data warehouses is free on all tiers.

Author: Or we just say "exports", which is probably neater.

### 2. It's built for engineers

> Anyone can use PostHog – just [ask our marketing team](/blog/posthog-marketing) – but our goal is to [help engineers be better at product](/blog/helping-engineers-to-product), so they spend less time shipping tickets, and more time shipping impactful features. 

Author: > * Talking about "data science" used by both (correlations for PostHog, "Illuminate" for Heap)

Will add this to product analytics section.

> Anyone can use PostHog – just [ask our marketing team](/blog/posthog-marketing) – but our goal is to [help engineers be better at product](/blog/helping-engineers-to-product), so they spend less time shipping tickets, and more time shipping impactful features. 

Author: Not sure about this suggestion, but maybe the original copy is a bit confusing? What's the difference between shipping tickets and impactful features? Will take a second look at this.

> Anyone can use PostHog – just [ask our marketing team](/blog/posthog-marketing) – but our goal is to [help engineers be better at product](/blog/helping-engineers-to-product), so they spend less time shipping tickets, and more time shipping impactful features. 

Reviewer: Agree, I don't really understand what shipping tickets means. Maybe "doing analysis" or "planning work"

            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
            <td>Understand how organizations of multiple users use your product</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td><strong>Formulas</strong></td>
            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
            <td>Use custom formulas to calculate unique insights</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td><strong>Query editor</strong></td>
            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-red text-lg">✖</span></td>
            <td className="text-center">Coming Q1 2023</td>
            <td>Write your own queries in SQL</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td><strong>Data retention</strong></td>
            <td className="text-center">1 year (pay for more)</td>
            <td className="text-center">7 years</td>
            <td>How long historical data is retained</td>
        </tr>             
    </tbody>
</table>
</div>

> ### Why autocapture?

> > Heap and PostHog are both autocapture events. This means you can just deploy a snippet and events (e.g. user clicked button, user viewed paged, etc.) are captured automatically, regardless of whether an event has been manually defined. This allows teams to ship new features faster as you don't need to update your event tracking every time you ship a change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Heap and PostHog both autocapture events. This means you can just deploy a snippet and events (e.g. user clicked button, user viewed paged, etc.) are captured automatically, regardless of whether an event has been manually defined. Teams don't need to update your event tracking every time they ship a change.
```

>
> That said, you can turn off, or fine-tine, autocapture if you are concerned about capturing too many events. See: See our integration docs for [more on configuring autocapture](/docs/integrate/ingest-live-data) 

<ArrayCTA />

### Session recording

Session recording is an essential tool for understanding how people use your product, especially for [early-stage companies](/blog/early-stage-analytics) searching for product-market fit. Both Heap and PostHog offer session recording, though Heap's version is quite limited at present.

<div className="overflow-x-auto -mx-5 px-5">
<table className="w-full mt-4" style="min-width: 600px;">
    <thead>
        <tr>
			<td className="w-3/12"></td>
            <td><strong>Heap</strong></td>
            <td><strong>PostHog</strong></td>
            <td></td>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td><strong>Free recording allowance</strong></td>
            <td className="text-center">None (free trial)</td>
            <td className="text-center">15,000 per month</td>
            <td>Free recordings before being charged</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>

>             <td><strong>Desktop app recording</strong></td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <td><strong>Browser app recording</strong></td>
```

        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td><strong>Console logs</strong></td>
            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-red text-lg">✖</span></td>
            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
            <td>Debug user problems and app errors</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td><strong>Network activity</strong></td>
            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-red text-lg">✖</span></td>
            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
            <td>Monitor network activity and performance</td>
        </tr>           
    </tbody>
</table>
</div>

- **Recording retention:** Heap keeps all recordings for 90 days, but retains any **viewed recordings** for 10 years. PostHog retains all recordings for three weeks, but retains recordings saved to a playlist forever. PostHog also allows you to download recordings to your computer as a `.json` file for safe keeping.

<ArrayCTA />

## Integrations

This section includes a curated summary of the most popular integrations in PostHog and Heap, organized by category.

> See the [PostHog Apps](/apps) and [Heap integrations](https://help.heap.io/category/integrations/) pages for complete lists of all available integrations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the [PostHog Apps](/apps) and [Heap integrations](https://help.heap.io/category/integrations/) pages for complete lists of available integrations.
```

            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
            <td>Organization single sign-on</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td><strong>User permissions</strong></td>
            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
            <td>Assign access levels to team members</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td><strong>Multiple organizations</strong></td>
            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
            <td>Create orgs for all your internal teams</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td><strong>Multiple projects</strong></td>
            <td className="text-center">2 (pay for more)</td>
            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
            <td>Track multiple products</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>
</div>

<ArrayCTA />

> ## Frequently asked questions

Reviewer: Can you use both for ecommerce sites? Or some question about ecommerce sites.

Reviewer: What do their data governance policies look like?

Reviewer: How scalable is Heap and PostHog?

Author: Not sure we want to into the weeds of data governance, but I'll add the other two.

Reviewer: Although Heap has a section on their site for "data governance" it doesn't seem more complicated than our project settings page 😅

### How long does it take to deploy PostHog?

Deploying PostHog takes mere minutes. Just [include our tracking snippet](/docs/integrate?tab=snippet) in your product or website and (thanks to autocapture) you're immediately capturing events. Once up and running, you can enable session recording via your project settings. See our guide to [getting started on PostHog Cloud](/docs/getting-started/cloud) for more info.

> ### How much do Heap and PostHog cost?

Author: ```suggestion
### How scaleable is PostHog?

PostHog is built on ClickHouse, the world’s fastest column-based database. It’s used by the likes of Uber, Spotify and Cloudflare, and allows us to handle billion-scale event volumes with ease.

Are you a company with more than 1 billion events per month? [Get in touch](/signup/cloud/enterprise) so we can discuss your needs and offer a volume discount.

### How much do Heap and PostHog cost?
```

Unlike PostHog, Heap doesn't share its pricing publicly, but its free tier is less generous.

Heap's free tier allows for only 10,000 sessions per month, "limited analysis", six months of data history, and limited access to data sources and integrations.

In comparison, PostHog offers 1 million events per month and 15,000 session recordings for free on all plans with no limits on data integrations – a typical medium-size B2B product with 10,000 monthly active users will generate ~500k events each month.

PostHog users who input their card unlock more features and can use billing limits to avoid surprise bills.

See [PostHog's pricing page](/pricing) for a full breakdown and access to our pricing calculator.

> ### Does PostHog use cookies?

Reviewer: Should this be its own section?

Author: I don't think so. While it's a nice to have, cookieless tracking is a serious USP for us.

Yes, PostHog (like Heap) uses cookies. Cookies are necessary to enable common use cases, such as cross-domain tracking and tracking returning visitors.

It is possible, however, to configure PostHog to track users without requiring without cookie banners by storing cookies in memory so it doesn't persist beyond an individual session.

The PostHog Property Filter app also allows you to further limit the types of information collected to protect user privacy.

If you user privacy is a primary concern for you, consider our [open source Docker Compose deployment](/docs/self-host/open-source/deployment) option.

> ### Can PostHog replace Google Analytics?

Author: ```suggestion
### Can you use PostHog on e-commerce websites?

Absolutely. PostHog is [easy to integrate on Shopify](/docs/integrate/third-party/shopify) and we have [Shopify](/apps/shopify) and [Stripe Connector](/apps/stripe-connector) apps for importing order and revenue data into PostHog for analysis. You can install PostHog on other e-commerce platform [using our Javascript snippet](/docs/integrate).

### Can PostHog replace Google Analytics?
```

Reviewer: Webflow and Wordpress mention would be nice too 😄

1. Heap is a product analytics tool designed for non-technical users.

2. PostHog is an all-in-one platform for product analytics, session recording, feature management, and more, built for engineers and product teams.

In this guide, we'll cover:

- Heap and PostHog's [core features](#core-features)
- [Product analytics](#product-analytics) features and insight types
- [Session recording](#session-recording) capability 
- [Third-party integrations](#integrations), including data export and data import options
- [Privacy](#privacy-compliance) and [security](#admin--security)
- [Frequently asked questions](#frequently-asked-questions)

## How is PostHog different to Heap?

### 1. PostHog is an all-in-one platform

Heap, like Amplitude and Mixpanel, focuses mainly on product analytics. That means you need to adopt multiple tools for things like session recording, feature management, and A/B testing. PostHog integrates all these features into one platform, so it becomes your single source of truth. We believe you should own your data, so data exports are free on all tiers.

### 2. PostHog's built for engineers

> Anyone can use PostHog – just [ask our marketing team](/blog/posthog-marketing) – but our goal is to [help engineers be better at product](/blog/helping-engineers-to-product), so they spend less time shipping tickets, and more time shipping impactful features. 

Author: ```suggestion
Anyone can use PostHog – just [ask our marketing team](/blog/posthog-marketing) – but our goal is to [help engineers be better at product](/blog/helping-engineers-to-product) by giving them the insights and tools they need to ship impactful features at pace. 
```

@ivanagas I think this lands better. Thoughts?

Reviewer: yes

Author: The kind of feedback I like to hear 😂

### 1. PostHog is an all-in-one platform

Heap, like Amplitude and Mixpanel, focuses mainly on product analytics. That means you need to adopt multiple tools for things like session recording, feature management, and A/B testing. PostHog integrates all these features into one platform, so it becomes your single source of truth. We believe you should own your data, so data exports are free on all tiers.

### 2. PostHog's built for engineers

Anyone can use PostHog – just [ask our marketing team](/blog/posthog-marketing) – but our goal is to [help engineers be better at product](/blog/helping-engineers-to-product) by giving them the insights and tools they need to ship impactful features at pace. 

### 3. Transparent pricing. No forced sales calls.

Signing up to PostHog is as simple as creating an account and [adding our JavaScript snippet](/docs/integrate) to your site or app. That's it. Want more features? Just put in a card and pay for what you use. We have a [generous free tier](/pricing), so you may not pay anything at all. No sales calls. No paid add-ons. No confusing product tiers. Just sign up and start building.

<ArrayCTA />

## Feature comparison

> PostHog has two plans (Free and Scale) to Heap's four (Free, Growth, Pro and Premier). In this guide, we'll compare PostHog's Scale plan to Heap Pro.

Author: ```suggestion
PostHog has three plans (Free, Scale and Enterprise) to Heap's four (Free, Growth, Pro and Premier). In this guide, we'll compare PostHog's Scale plan to Heap Pro as they're the most comparable plans for a typical, mid-market business.
```

### Core features

> While it recently added a basic session recording feature, Heap is best-known as a pure product analytics tool like Mixpanel or Amplitude.
> 
> PostHog includes product analytics, but also integrates session recording, feature flagging, A/B testing, and more into its all-in-one platform. This removes the need to run multiple tools, saving money and implementation time.

Author: ```suggestion
PostHog integrates several normally separate tools, such as product analytics, session recording, and feature flags, into one platform. While it recently added a basic session recording feature, Heap is best-known as a pure product analytics tool like Mixpanel or Amplitude.
```

            <td className="text-center">Paid add-on</td>
            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
            <td>Sync data to and from your data warehouse</td>
        </tr>            
    </tbody>
</table>
</div>

- **Session recording:** Heap offers basic session recording in addition to its core product analytics product, but it's a bolt-on option on all plans. Session recording is built-in to PostHog and you get 15,000 free recordings every month. **Jump to:** [Session recording comparison](#session-recording)

- **Sync to data warehouse:** The ability to sync with your data warehouse is part of Heap Connect, a paid add-on on to Heap's Pro plan – it's included on Heap's Premier plan. Data warehouse sync is available in PostHog at no additional cost because we believe companies should own their data.

- **Experiments:** Heap doesn't have a built-in testing feature, though it does integrate with a number of popular A/B testing tools, such as AB Tasty and Optimizely. PostHog has a [built-in experimentation suite](/product/experimentation-suite) for running A/B and multivariate experiments.

> - **Feature flagging:** The [benefits of feature flags](/blog/feature-flag-benefits-use-cases) include the ability to stagger new feature releases, ship to test groups or specific cohorts, manage feature access, and more. PostHog's feature flag product is built-in and tightly integrated with all other products.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Feature flagging:** The [benefits of feature flags](/blog/feature-flag-benefits-use-cases) include the ability to stagger new feature releases, ship to test groups or specific cohorts, manage feature access, and more. PostHog's feature flag product is built-in and tightly integrated with all other products.

- **Open source:** PostHog is open source and self-hostable via Docker Compose for small event volumes ~ 100k events per month. See our [open source deployment docs](/docs/self-host/open-source/deployment) for more.
```

            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
            <td>Understand how organizations of multiple users use your product</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td><strong>Formulas</strong></td>
            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
            <td>Use custom formulas to calculate unique insights</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td><strong>Query editor</strong></td>
            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-red text-lg">✖</span></td>
            <td className="text-center">Coming Q1 2023</td>
            <td>Write your own queries in SQL</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td><strong>Data retention</strong></td>
            <td className="text-center">1 year (pay for more)</td>
            <td className="text-center">7 years</td>
            <td>How long historical data is retained</td>
        </tr>             
    </tbody>
</table>
</div>

> 
> > ### Why autocapture?
> > Heap and PostHog both autocapture events. This means you can just deploy a snippet and events (e.g. user clicked button, user viewed paged, etc.) are captured automatically, regardless of whether an event has been manually defined. Teams don't need to update your event tracking every time they ship a change.
> >
> > Alternative tools, like Amplitude and Mixpanel, force you to manually instrument every event you want to track. This means you can only create queries based on events you've chosen to track in advance. Every time you think of something new to track, you need to instrument an event and then wait for the data.
> >
> > Some would have you believe that autocapture generates "too much data" that's hard to deal with. Our answer?
> >
> > To quote Tony Stark: “An intelligence agency which fears intelligence is, historically, not awesome.”
> >
> > That said, you can turn off, or fine-tune, autocapture if you are concerned about capturing too many events. See our integration docs for [more on configuring autocapture](/docs/integrate/ingest-live-data) 
> 
> <ArrayCTA />

Author: ```suggestion
```

            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
            <td>Organization single sign-on</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td><strong>User permissions</strong></td>
            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
            <td>Assign access levels to team members</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td><strong>Multiple organizations</strong></td>
            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
            <td>Create orgs for all your internal teams</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td><strong>Multiple projects</strong></td>
            <td className="text-center">2 (pay for more)</td>
            <td className="text-center"><span className="text-green text-lg">✔</span></td>
            <td>Track multiple products</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>
</div>

> <ArrayCTA />

Author: ```suggestion
```
